---
layout: post
title: Vim Reboot 2
published: false
---

In my [last post](/2011/10/02/vim-reboot-1.html) I installed
MacVim and setup some very basic options specifically for it. For the
next few posts, I'll be focusing on features that can be applied to the
more common, server-side version.

### Syntax Highlighting

The first thing I wanted to have was some syntax highlighting.

{% highlight bash %}
    set t_Co=256
    colorscheme mike_wombat

    syntax enable
{% endhighlight %}

`set t_Co=256` sets vim up to run in 256 color mode (I use [iTerm 2](http://www.iterm2.com/#/section/home)).

`colorscheme mike_wombat` sets the colors scheme to a slightly
customized version of the wombat color scheme. Like the ir_black theme
from my previous post, this can be found [here](https://github.com/mcramm/dotfiles/blob/master/vim/colors/mike_wombat.vim). Just move it into `~/.vim/colors` to use it.

`syntax enable` enables syntax highlighting.

### Backup Directory

Vim keeps a backup of any files you open in the form of _filename_.swp.
If your vim session crashes, or the connection to your server times out,
then you can use this file to recover any edits you've made.

The problem is that these files can sometimes get in the way. The most
common complaint I hear is with these files getting included as part of
a commit to a repository.

Some people choose to turn this feature off completely and not have
these backups created at all. I think that these backups can be valuable
and prefer to simply have them written to a different directory.

{% highlight bash %}
    set backupdir=~/.vim/backup
    set directory=~/.vim/backup
{% endhighlight %}

Any backup files will now be created in `~/.vim/backup`. You may need to
make the directory manually before the feature will work (though you
should get prompted with an error when launching vim).
