---
layout: post
published: false
---

### An Addendum

In a previous post, I described how to get syntax highlighting working,
but I forgot to add a setting to enable plugins and indentation based
on filetype:

{% highlight bash %}
    filetype plugin indent on
{% endhighlight %}

### Searching

Every vim user should know how to search for text within a file. In
normal mode, simply hit `/` and type in a search string. Hit `Enter`
and your cursor will jump to the first occurance of that string. The
following options make searching a little bit nicer:

{% highlight bash %}
    set hlsearch
    set incsearch
    set ignorecase
    set smartcase
{% endhighlight %}

`hlsearch` highlights every occurance of your search in the file after
you press the `Enter` key.

`incsearch` moves the cursor and begins highlighting the search term as
you are typing it.

`ignorecase` will make your searching case insensitve. Searching for
"foobar" will match "foobar", "FOOBAR", and everything inbetween.

`smartcase` is used in conjunction with `ignorecase`. If your search
term contains an uppercase letter, then the search will be case
sensitive. Searching for "foobar" will work as before, but "fooBar",
will only match other occurances of "fooBar".


### Status Line

At the bottom of the vim window there is a status line that (by default)
simply displays the name of currently open file. There are ways, of
course, to customize this, and I'll be doing a lot more with it in a
later post. For now, all I want to do is insert the cursor's current
line/column number, and make sure that it is *always* visible.

{% highlight bash %}
    set ruler
    set laststatus=2
{% endhighlight %}

`ruler` puts in the cursor's current line/column number.

`laststatus` tells vim when to show it's status line. It can have 3
possible values:

* `0` Tells it to never appear.
* `1` Tells it to only appear when there are more than 2 windows open.
* `2` Forces it to always be visible.

As I said, there are even more ways to customize this line, but for the
customization I want to do, I'll need to install a plugin.

This is the end of the most basic setup options. Next time I'll start
enabling the plugins that I use most frequently.
